i'm really happy to be able to talk with
paul today about his experiences using
space repetition to learn mathematics
um for those of you who don't know paul
is a mathematician from quebec
and he's been using space repetition to
learn mathematics for
an exceedingly long period of time how
long is it all together actually paul
um space repetition uh
i think six months and a half a little
bit more
and mathematics sorry six years and a
half
and uh for mathematics itself maybe
uh six years or five years and a half
wow i'm not too sure about the exact
numbers
beautiful so could you take us like
right back to the beginning like how did
you
learn about using space repetition
because it's quite a it's quite a niche
topic
obviously for certain domains like
language learning it's become
quite prevalent but for mathematics like
i was i was saying earlier before we
started recording
you know there's not that much
information specifically about using
space repetition for mathematics so how
did you come across it
okay so uh something like
seven years ago i was interested in
learning about learning so i got a few
books on the topic and i think one of
uh first is called out to how we learn
the surprising truth about when where
and why it happened by
benedict carey and on it he mentioned
space repetition and at some point i
found about the pietra's website
and i was instantly uh hooked on the
topic
and i start first to learn about uh
standard vocabulary but i kept thinking
there must be a way to learn math but
without the latex plugin
i didn't know how to do to do it with a
super memo i was not able to
to learn any kind of advanced math i but
at some point
a person told me about the enki
and then i discovered that there were
software with
latex and that's all i learned about
space repetition
and okay okay so were you already quite
advanced at math by the time you started
using space repetition yes
i already had a phd
no sorry i already had the bachelor in
math okay i
was doing at the time a phd in
theoretical computer science
okay so i already had
a lot of knowledge in math and it was
helpful because
i might know where the particular answer
to a particular question
is even if i don't recall everything
so one of the things that really
interested me about
uh the discussion we did a couple of
months ago where you talked about
both your experiences learning
mathematics and also learning stoicism
as well
you mentioned that you sort of developed
your own system
it really is kind of like a system or
method for learning mathematics
um could you sort of briefly
give like a general introduction to your
method of learning
um math knowledge with space repetition
uh very well uh first
a lot of it i consider is just an
application of
petra's ideas on flashcard formulation
and the
the essence is that your questions need
um sorry let me talk about the kind of
statement that there are in math that we
might be interested in
learning uh in mathematics at the most
fundamental
level uh there existed three kinds of
statement
one is axioms so an axon is just a
statement that you take
as true then there exists
definition and finally there exists the
theorems and they're proof and a
definition in some sense
is a chunk so when i say that
an object is a group for example i i'm
saying that it has a certain list of
properties i converted a huge
list of properties into a short
meaningful
thing we already see a link with the
psychology in psychology we can
of learning we know that to learn more
and more complex
concepts we we have to chunk
we have to uh regroup things in a
meaningful way and
finally uh there are theorems and
they're proof and
there's really uh nothing a theorem is
merely a statement that is true
and that as a proof and the proof is
just a sequence of
statements that uh lead
to the fact that the term is true and uh
so my general method is that uh
i i learn uh axioms by
by just asking standard questions about
them like can you state the action of
choice
and i learned group theory just by
making a class deletion
and for example learning what is a group
i will say uh
g is a group uh if and then there's a
list of things like uh
it has a binary associated and the
operation is
associative there is a neutral element
and there is an inverse
so it's just like memorizing a standard
list
and finally i memorize proof
by uh closing the theorem
and when it's time for the proof i just
memorized it line by line
but the the important thing is that each
line of the proof
need to uh to be either something that
has been proven previously or a ver
a very trivial application of it or the
application
of rules of inference that i've already
mastered
and that's
that's about the idea so i would not say
i'm doing anything
new it's just that there's a set of
skills that need to be learned
at and that are not learned usually in
mathematics
uh one is to have a proof that are much
simpler than usual
okay okay so it seems like when you're
learning axioms and definitions this is
very similar to
most of the other kinds of learning that
people do with
space repetition it sounds very similar
to sort of vocabulary learning with
language learning
or just like learning history with space
repetition
um there's not that much that's
different but it really does seem like
there's
kind of a difference with the way you
learn theorems
with oh sorry uh like proofs and
theorems with um
space repetition so um could you go a
little bit deeper into
uh specifically how you go about um
learning proofs because i think one of
the difficulties is that
proofs are very similar to sort of long
lists of
uh items like enumerations and anyone
who's read
obviously the 20 rules of item
formulation by pyota
knows that enumerations and lists are
like the number one thing that are
really hard to
uh encode as items and they often end up
being um
leeches or lapses or whatever uh so how
do you go about
actually creating how do you go about
formulating a theorem that can be turned
into
atomic flashcards so
um if let me just think about this one
let me talk a little bit about what what
is a proof uh
first uh so in in math uh if you start
with
logic uh a proof start with a
a few elementary statements that that
are called axons and a bunch of rules of
inference for for example
uh if
in my uh proof there's the statement p
and then there's the sent statement p
implies q i have the right to write
in the next next line q and
this is a very very simple rule of
inference
and it might not look like it in
mathematics but every
every proof if you were to write it down
in using a logical
language and completely unpack it it
would
at every step use rules that are that
simple
in the same so the way i do it
is uh by using very very simple rules of
inference
and also by doing a lot of chunking
where i
increase my numbers of rules of
inference let me try to uh
to give an example there exist rules of
inference that are more useful than
other rules of inference for example if
you start with the the rules of natural
deductions
and you consider a lot like de morgan's
law that say that the negation of
p or q is equal to
the negation of p and the negation of q
if you add this
this rule of inference into your proof
system uh
this will shorten your proof all your
proof because it's the statement that
you use
all the time so a lot of it is about
finding statements
that recur a lot and uh rules of
inference that are
kind of like a useful to add
to the huge collection of knowledge that
you do have
in such a way that the proof uh get
all your proofs get simplified so the
the way
you write simple proofs is by having
uh lots and lots of rules of inference
that have a great applicability very
interesting okay so i'm going to try and
um
uh having listened to that i'm going to
try and sort of explain how i think of
it
and i'm going to ask you whether it's
correct because i i kind of want to give
a uh almost like an analogy for perhaps
people who are just starting out
learning math like me
or uh just someone who isn't really
familiar with mathematics so
when you're talking about um building up
uh sort of you you're sort of talking
about building up larger rules of
influence
that can form sort of larger reasoning
steps larger reasoning shortcuts
um from more funded fundamental uh
reasoning rules basically um yes so
to sort of make it uh this is how i
think of it i think of it like natural
language if you imagine
you can have like a sentence like um
the person who teaches students and that
sentence can be represented
by a smaller chunk just the the noun
teacher because they're a person who
teaches students and then
in you can replace that longer sentence
with a much shorter sentence teacher and
it's like
you have this reasoning short shortcut
so that's essentially what you're doing
when you're reusing for example theorems
that you've already proved or you're
using
larger um uh like rules of inference
built from smaller ones it's like
like yeah just like you said like
chunking i guess
trunking occur more often in
definitions so a definition is really a
chunk but when you uh
i would not say necessarily that a
theorem is a chunk uh for example de
morgan's law
uh rep replaced two so i'll
i'll keep using that example the
negation of p or q
is equal to the negation of p and the
negation of q
um this is not necessarily shorter but
it's just
very reusable it's a pattern that come
often and by adding rules that come
often
you uh you don't have to reprove
everything twice or three times or four
times
i'm reminded of uh a quote i read the
other day
in one of what's his articles it was
like um
you know intelligence can be split into
a bunch of different components and one
is like the amount of general knowledge
you have
but the more important one that was
stresses is having
being able to think in abstract terms
and having these
very abstract and uh applicable use like
rules of inference that you can reuse in
lots of different areas
so is is that sort of the benefit yes
okay so that's an important
part you want the rules of inference
your your rules that allow you to go
from
one statement to another to be as
general as possible
uh because that allows you to reuse them
a lot to give an example to people here
if i say that 2 plus 3 is equal to
3 plus 2 it's not as
useful as a bit of knowledge as knowing
that for any pairs of natural numbers
m and n m plus n is equal to n
plus m so
one deserves to be memorized
because you will use that thousands of
times in your life well
while the other is much less important
so we are looking
for the concepts that get the most reuse
and stephen wolfram uh wrote a post
about
that where uh he found out that a lot of
things that mathematician
uh considered important enough to write
in the theorem in the book
are the the statements that have the the
greatest ability to prove other
statements very interesting so
um you know from my cursory knowledge of
mathematics and having looked through
like a couple of math textbooks uh it
seems like
the the proofs tend to be really long
right so
yes how do you go about turning
something that's really long
into something that's short enough to be
uh like
turned into flashcards okay so
you said they tend to be really long but
they they could also be
even worse in the sense that uh
they're they are made for people who are
not using space repetition they're made
for uh
people who have a pen paper and
pencil and these but they still cannot
be a
super super long because else even your
memory would fail you
so they they already have to to
incorporate some simplification and some
chunking
it's just that you exaggerate the
process uh if a proof
in a manual is one page long
it can always be decomposed into lemmas
and sublimes and sub some
lemmas and what you do is
you take a proof that depend on many
complex statement and
you you find what are these these big
statements
and one thing you have to do absolutely
is you can't just cut and paste the
proof you find in the manual
it will be way too complex for space
repetition in space repetitions
one when one line of a proof should be a
super simple rule of inference
and the proof should be super short else
you will feel overwhelmed by the
complexity you won't be able to compute
it in your head
and uh one thing that i find very
important
is to have way more definitions uh and
way more
theorems than you would naturally see in
a textbook
so for example
i i was working recently on
a proof that the kolmogorov complexity
function is uncomputable
and uh in a textbook uh
they will not add as much definition as
i do i might add a definition
for the proof and for the context of the
proof instead of
introducing a function f that i will
completely forget about
i might give a very uh
italian name to that function f i call
it and
and i will make a flashcard that defined
this function with
that name what is it and then i will
remember it outside of the context of
the proof
and you have to do that basically
you have to make every
portion of the proof able to stand alone
on its own
uh where you're able to unpack every
part of the statement in your head
where every part of the the proof and
need to come from
a rule of inference that you already
master and it can be
done um i'll just give an analogy
uh the the most uh
you do cutting right yeah
okay so if i have a super complicated
program
i i could probably uh simplify it into a
bunch of
sub function i could have an algorithm
that has several
parts and i could give meaningful name
to this part and these subparts i could
decompose themselves into sub functions
and sub sub function
up to the point where you arrive at the
elementary operations of
computers exactly yeah
interesting it can be done
so would it be okay to show some
examples of cards
i think it would really help with uh
with people trying to understand uh
so this was a random flash card
i'll give a complete example i'll give a
complete example
let me let me give you another one
this was a former leash and i'm proud to
say that it's no longer
a leech what i'm going to show you
so it's a proof that the the karma graph
complexity is not a total computable
function
and uh as for memorizing the statement
it's really hard to close that statement
but if you've memorized the proof you
will instantly know that
[Music]
just by having done the proof i will
instantly know that the statement is
true because
the proof flashes in my mind and the
proof as one two three four five six
line
it's a super short proof as you can see
and it's a proof by contradiction so i
suppose that it is
uh total computable and then uh
the next line of the proof is that
another function that i call very comp
is not all computable
and i made a flash card that says that
if comma graph is total computable
then very comp is not computable and i
memorized the implication and i
memorized the proof
of that implication so i memorized in
another flashcard that
if kalmagrov is totally comfortable
barry cump is total computable
so i already know that then the third
line
is an application of uh what's called
the clean recursion theorem
and i already have a flash card that say
that if there exists a
if a function is total computable in
that case the
if a function is total computable um
then there exists an x such that
universal of x is equal to uh
f of x for the function that is uh total
chemical so it's just an instantiation
of a rule that i already know
uh so so this one is just an application
of ethereum i know that term by heart
and then there's two other statements
that i proved separately that the
uh kolmogorov of universal x is lower
and equal
to the length of x and column graph of
various columns is
greater than x and then i've obtained
that
uh these two quantity are equal yet one
has a length
lower or equal than the length of x and
then the author has a
length greater than x so i've
obtained a contradiction and poof kalmar
graph complexity is
uh therefore not total computable it's
not important
for the people who are seeing this to uh
to know there it's called computer
science but all i want to say is that
i've used only very simple rules of
inference and
it was not presented as simply as that
when i first saw the proof
very interesting okay so um
just to go back really to the basics so
this first
picture that you posted is that like the
question side that you see
when it pops up yeah
that's the question side and the way i
do them
so the first one i posted it's just a
proof that sun of x is equal to
the imaginary part of e to the power of
ix
and uh there's a bunch of uh
things uh so this is the statement
itself and
generally i have to scroll down to see
the proof this way because all these
clauses are
linked in minimalism i i never want to
see the
lines that come afterward in a proof i i
nev
i i always want to uh
and when i look just at the statement i
don't want to see the proof so
that's that's a bit weird okay
ah no i understand now i understand so
what you see is
at the top you see like uh an assumption
do you ever have more than one
assumption like right in the in the
first picture you have let x
is a real number or whatever would you
have multiple yeah
yeah okay okay um and then
you don't want too many assumptions at
some point you want to chunk your
assumptions
uh okay okay okay and then
you can see it says proof and then
you're allowed to scroll down
until you see the close thing and then
you have to
answer what's in the close yes yes
so and sometimes the statement itself
that is close so i state
i close part of the statement when it's
possible and i always close the proof
and there's another thing i started
doing uh recently
is that after each new flash card i
create i
type a bunch of random
numbers and letters and if i do a sub
proof
i copy paste these random numbers and
letters
so that this way i can easily
find the all related flash cards okay
okay okay
could you give an example of that oh yes
yes i
will for the kolmogorov function so um
oh okay you can see there's a bunch of
random letters at the end
yes yes now now i'm just going to show
you
another flash card and it's really easy
for me to find them so i
there was this is another statement
related
okay and so you've pasted in the same
sequence of
uh exactly at the end yes and so this is
like a
sort of a is it completely manual like
you you just make up the random numbers
yourself or
is there something yes and
seriously it helps a lot okay okay and
so this is like
sort of a manual way of doing i think
someone mentioned in the chat
um yeah bit for brains so this is
the random numbers almost like a zettel
custom type
sort of internal link if you're familiar
with that uh
i don't know settle cast and type
internal links
okay okay the goal is just to be able to
quickly um
if i have a proof i quickly want to find
the sub statement
and sometime i want to delete some
because they're no longer useful once
i've changed the proof or
or sometimes it's even to link a
statement to another
so i i started doing this and i i really
like it
very interesting yeah is it a lot of
work to do this it seems like
uh uh okay okay
oh i okay here's the the general process
whenever i do a proof
um every time there's like something i
want to simplify
i just start with a copy and paste and i
it's a copy and paste it's not a lot of
work very nice
yeah this is really cool so uh are all
of your cards
are they all closed cards um or do you
have some q and a's as well
um i started with q a at some point
but the truth is a q a is like can be
done with a clause so i just use clauses
i'm the same yeah they're just quicker
yeah
oh and also how do you deal with um
like conflicts of symbols uh oh
yes um so um
you do it by starting to differentiate
your
symbols uh to to give an example
of a symbol differentiation i
um you might say
i type i might talk about the natural
number greater than zero or the natural
number
uh great greater or equal than zero by
adding little
symbols on it so you you can add
more symbol uh you can start using
different symbols
you don't want a conflict of symbols
because
uh in ordinary mathematics you already
know the context
but in space repetition you navigate
from context to context so quickly
that you should be able to look at the
symbol and know instantaneously what it
means
and you the worst thing you could write
is stuff like what is the function f
equal to i don't know what the function
f is because it's used for so many
different things
so that's why you want to give very
meaningful names to your function
okay so that's uh like the berry comp
thing
that's like a yes example of a name that
you've just made up
yeah it's a name i i just made up
because before it
it was a leash because i called it the
function f and that i gave the
definition of f
but then i got all mixed up but now when
you talk about the bearcam function
of course i know what it is okay does
this make it difficult to communicate
with other mathematicians if you
start talking about berry comps do they
just look at you like you're crazy
okay the thing is i would never talk
about the very function to other
mathematicians
i would tell them what the function do
okay okay
and then i'm no longer a crazy person
okay okay yeah someone mentioned in the
chat this does look
quite similar i guess to neural linking
you're creating links between these
um between all of these related uh
proofs and theorems and things do you
ever do like subset reviews
of a given theorem to try and when
you're problem solving perhaps or
researching um a topic because uh all
the theorems are always clearly in my
head
with the high recall so
okay so you don't find it really
necessary to do it
no and there's not that the option in
the museum okay okay uh do you have any
cards where there's like
additional context um in like a in
a field like perhaps in parentheses you
put like
i don't know the history of why this
thing is useful or
maybe some maybe some intuition like
maybe not just formal statements you put
like some intuition about
a given theorem or definition
yeah yeah let me give you one because
that might be interesting
uh we will continue with the same
example
do you see what i just sent yes yes
so this was part of the same sequence
the barycam function what is it
i have bought the formal definition and
this one is like
with lots of words okay okay i did both
it's rare i do that but uh i really
wanted
not just the formal statement but the
clear intuitive understanding of what's
going on
and sometimes most of the time it's not
necessary but this one i found a bit
tricky and i added
both a formal proof and an intuitive
proof of some of the statements
general i have super formal proof but
for this one that i i found a bit tricky
i i
decided to add the intuitive
explanations
okay okay and so do you usually find
that's not really necessary you prefer
to keep things formal or do you often
add this sort of intuition
it's the only it's very funny you ask
this because it's the only proof where i
have an intuitive explanation oh really
okay okay
yes yes and it's because it caused me
some troubles for various reasons so uh
oh interesting oh oh that reminds me
i was reading as as i think in the last
event you mentioned that there was a
paper by leslie lampard
that was very important to sort of the
development of this method that you use
and leslie lamport for those of you
don't know he wrote
he wrote a paper called how to write a
proof and he's actually published
a new version of it i think in 2012 the
original one was from like the 1990s
and yeah could you sort of explain why
that paper is important and sort of the
ideas that it gave you
that led you to develop this method
um so i'm not even sure if
the ideas themselves led me to develop
the method it's just that
uh i realized that
the method i was used was already used
in this paper
okay okay okay so you'd already had your
method
i i don't even recall but i i don't even
think i read the paper
okay okay or i read a few page and it
okay but let me explain the paper in the
paper leslie lampard says that most
proof are too complex
and that they should be decomposed into
substatement and sub-sub-statement
up to the point where each statement is
extremely elementary but in the case of
leslie lampard you wanted that for
uh arsonary like uh mathematics called
writing
so his suggestion is that in ordinary
mathematical writing you should do that
and he says it makes
the proof clearer and
it is certainly the case for space
preposition that you have to do that
there's no uh
there there's no choice it's really the
the only way and
the reason i recommended the paper is
because it gives a clear explanation of
the steps to do to decompose a proof and
it gives many many examples
so for people that are interested in
learning that i recommend
reading the paper but i don't even
remember whether i was inspired or not
because i think that's the only way to
do and it should be the
yeah at least in space repetitions yes
yes happened
rather naturally because the truth is
that my early proof
were very complicated and they led to
leashes
and then at some point i started
decomposing the thing into sub
statement and shorter and shorter
substatement until the point where my
proof were all very
uh very short and uh
very few lines like when i started i
think i had a proof with 20 lines and
it works for the first week but at some
point it starts to really break down in
your mind like
you no longer remember what you're doing
yes
exactly yeah i i mentioned him because
um
he right at the beginning of the paper i
i've made it like
halfway through i think so far and he's
he's really criticizing sort of the
essay style of writing a proof because
it's imprecise it's easy to make errors
um and he's sort of talking about it in
the context of doing like mathematical
research or whatever
but it's also very important obviously
for the space repetition because
you need to as you just said you need to
keep things short you need to keep
things concise
so that you can create atomic flashcards
which are important like
they're just an important thing to be
able to remember something
all right so i think at this point
i realized i didn't make it very far
through all of these questions there
were so many good questions that people
were asking
um but i bet there are people right
now like listening to the event who have
questions who want to ask them so
i guess uh i can open it up if someone's
got a question
um feel free to just unmute yourself and
go ahead and oh just a reminder that
everything's being recorded so
if you don't want um to be recorded post
your question in the general voice and
i can read it out for you so yeah uh
go ahead if anyone's got a question
how do you you mentioned like you have
net uh names for like
uh sub statements in a proof that
wouldn't necessarily be a
formal theorem in the in the book or the
paper
and you gave an example of one of the
names the the berry comp
do you have a a system for for
choosing names because i can imagine if
you name
statements poorly you're then kind of
just adding
load of like something else you need to
memorize rather than something that's
intuitive
um i don't think there is a system for
naming things but you're right
that the names should be intuitive and
there's a reason why i called it the
bear function
here it's because it's related to
something called the
berry paradox and
it's the this function is completely
related to various paradox so that's why
i call it the varicon function
so uh of course you want the thing uh
the symbols to be meaningful and to be
related to other images and
and names in your head but i don't think
there's a system for
naming things not anymore that there's a
system for naming things in real life
there's lots of way people go about it
but of course a good name should uh
activate something in your head
is it kind of like a mnemonic in a sense
i guess so it's something that a
a good name should
should be intuitively clear um but
um i i don't think there's a formal way
of
generating good names
very nice uh oh there's a good question
from bit for brains
do you use images in your cards
i wish oh you wish you didn't use them
i wish but well i realized that for my
category theory
there's no choice but to use a better
image i can't just use the
the standard latex and i need to use
latex to create the diagrams
there is this field of mathematics where
i i realize
after many years that you can't just
learn line by line a diagram might be
clearer than a line
and one of these field is category
theory i need to learn how to make
images
that's one of my goals like for this
year oh cool
oh that's really interesting so that's
that's for like a
category theory you mentioned is an area
of mathematics where
the diagrams are really useful and
important
um are there any times where
you use diagrams to give you sort of a
geometric
intuition where it's not necessary it's
just because it gives you a better sense
um i don't do a lot of geometry so no
okay but i do think
for people who that study geometry
having a
drawings might help and another field
where it's absolutely important to to do
drawings is graph theory
[Music]
i could in theory describe a graph by
giving the list of his edge
but it's not and the vertices but
it's not as easy to memorize as just
the image in many cases okay that makes
sense
okay nitros has got a very good question
that i forgot to ask
um how do you practice problem solving
and how do you schedule problems and
like
um work with those uh with inside the
space repetition system
um that's a cool question
in the sense that uh
problem solving is something people do
at school where they have a manual and
there's a list of problems
but in reality uh all these problems are
about proving theorems
so it's the same standard method
if there's a theorem that i want to
to prove because i think it's
interesting and i think i might have a
proof
i will practice it using normal pen and
i will try to solve it using my my brain
and pen of paper and then i will note
the proof in the space repetition system
so uh the answer is that i first have to
solve the problem and then i remember
the steps
okay okay so you don't put problems that
you want to solve
inside uh the space repetition system
you put problems that you've already
solved in that
yes okay and so how do you balance
like um could you like take us through
like a day in the life of paul
like uh how do you split up your space
repetition
learning from your like working on
problems on paper
learning um
it's very from day to day but uh
often uh there's like a statement that
will really
uh interest me and i might start uh
researching it on wikipedia and thinking
about it
and and
then doing it maybe the proof already
exists somewhere then
it's easy i just have to copy and paste
it or
or i you have to solve it in
in a normal traditional way like a
normal traditional mathematician
uh the the fun and the space repetition
the space repetition
fun begins afterwards once you've solved
it
then i write the proof and the magic
happens like
afterward when i'm doing the repetition
often i'll think oh the
or when i write it down often i'll see a
way to simplify to simplify and to
simplify
i think we work on a very simple problem
together
uh recently about set theory uh you
you came with a a statement that you
wanted to prove
uh the fact that the empty set is
different from the set that contain the
empty set itself
and while writing down the proof i
i realized that there was an
intermediary statement
and let me tell you something funny
about that intermediary statement
in my space repetition flash card i had
to use that rule twice today the fact
that
if that is not empty then there exists
and
it's true if only if there exits an
element inside it
that's awesome so
for the people that are here james uh
was learning
set theory and he wanted to prove that
the empty set is different from the set
that contained the
empty set and in set theory there's an
axiom called the iso of extensionality
that state that two sets are equal
precisely whenever they contain
the same elements and there's another
axiom that says that the
there is a set that is the empty set and
that set contains nothing
and by using that sum of extensionality
and direction of the
empty set we can find out that if a set
contains an element
then it's not the empty set exactly yeah
i was uh i was really trying to prepare
for this uh talk so i was trying to
boost up my
uh proving skills that um unfortunately
i'm still not very good at mathematics
but me and paul we actually want to do
like
perhaps in the future like a series of
videos where uh
either it's me learning and he's like
watching me commentating or
giving me tips while i try to prove
something or try to reformulate
what i've already created in a space
repetition system
or the other way around when he's
learning and i'm asking him questions
because i think it'd be really useful
to have that sort of uh that pairing
between the complete beginner
and paul who's been doing this for a
long time so
i think that might be useful in the
future um
so someone's written here uh
how do you practice oh no sorry do you
use incremental
problem solving um as recommended by
pierre
i'm not sure what's incremental problem
solving i think it's just
having a problem and you know
maybe you work on it uh on friday
and then next week you you don't really
think about it at all and then you come
back to it and
maybe you make a little bit more
progress and incremental bit of progress
and then you come back a month later
and you realize that you've thought of
something in that in between time that
can help you solve it so it's like
you just slowly solve it over time do
you ever do that
um i think that's how we solve all
problems
but that
i i think even normal mathematicians do
that all the time
where they start with the ethereum and
in the beginning it's super complicated
and even them they find simplification
it's just that they don't have to go
as far as space preparations
practitioners have to go
uh so i think that's the only way to
solve problems
interesting oh yes there's a really good
question here
have you made any connections or solved
any problems in your work as a
mathematician
that you directly attribute to your use
of srs
yes my own thesis your thesis
brilliant yeah
i mean that i i did a lot of theorem
abstraction
inside the thesis where i was trying to
find the more
more general statement and i think
the only way to reach the ultimate
abstraction was with the
base repetition and remembering all
these abstractions
oh amazing have you got like a good
um problem-solving story of uh maybe
uh that involves you looking through
your space repetition or doing
uh doing your repetitions and realizing
that there's
some some theorem that you can use that
you never thought of or or something
like that some serendipitous connection
that you've made
this happened all the time but it's
never uh but because it's so
incremental it doesn't make a good story
okay okay okay
like oh yes i i made a teeny bit of
progress today i
removed two lines of a proof it's just
but my own thesis um
is a bit about that it started at some
as something super super ugly
and it got more and more and more
beautiful over time
but uh there was no uh
there were several steps that made it
more and more beautiful so so i can't
say oh at that moment everything
got super beautiful of course not we're
increment believers and incremental
progress so
at that moment things were a little bit
more beautiful i was hoping for
something akin to
you know newton sitting under the tree
and the apple falls on his head but i
suppose
in most cases yeah it's just a story
i suppose in most cases it is actually
very difficult to record
a creative process because everything
does happen so incrementally
you might be recording uh and like
showing that progress over such a long
period of time that it's not really
obvious
uh there's no sudden realization or
anything like that
okay oh i forgot to ask you there was
something you mentioned
um in the last talk he did uh something
about
how like 50 or more of the new knowledge
that you add into the space repetition
system
is just generated based on stuff that
you've already got in there
can you talk about that process um
well one thing that often happened is
that you have a statement
that that in a pr
and you realize the statement can be
abstracted you
uh let me uh
give a very simple proof a very simple
statement in group theory you can prove
that
the the
neutral element is unique but
it turned out that this proof is also
true in mono
theory where you don't use all the full
axons of group theory
so that was one of my earliest
realization when i was doing space
repetition
i had memorized the context so i had to
say the one is unique
in what structure and i i said the group
but because i remember the proof
i told myself wait a minute i don't use
the inverse so it's valid in the monoid
and that was when i discovered for the
first time that
when you use space repetition because
you i knew every step of the proof i
knew which
hypothesis were used and it made it very
easy to remove unnecessary hypothesis
so one so part of the process is just
trimming
your theorems by removing any kind of
unnecessary hypothesis and it's easy to
do the more and more abstraction and
structure you know and the more you know
your proof because you know
which hypothesis is used or not and
perhaps
in my case the most amazing one was when
uh i started abstracting my proofs of
linear algebra over and over and over
and i i discovered a lot of proof of
material theory which is an abstraction
of linear algebra
just by making more and more abstract
proofs
and at some point i learned that someone
had already done all the work but it was
really magical that
the process happened so naturally and i
think
any user of space repetitions will uh
come at many
similar abstractions so it's not a
so that's an example but there's also
the fact that sometimes you generate
hypothesis from your uh
knowledge like there's an idea you think
might be true or not and then you start
proving it and it's easier to prove
because you have all the knowledge
inside your head you don't need to
look at as much into books because the
to to prove a new idea to generate a new
idea it's much easier when the knowledge
is inside you
yeah that's awesome that's like very
motivating
for me as someone who's starting out
learning mathematics that sounds like
such a
fascinating and interesting process it
sounds very similar almost to
i guess similar to incremental writing
in a way it's
like i don't know it just changes the
way i think about
math in a way that makes it seem much
more exciting like that incremental
abstraction
you're you're creating something it's
very creative process and not just
i don't know memorizing theorems it's
very interesting
and so um in your day-to-day
sort of uh in your day-to-day studying
how much time do you spend doing
repetitions versus
reformulating and doing that incremental
abstraction that you talked about
i would say i spend the
ah it's it's a
i would say 50 50 but maybe the numbers
are wrong it's hard for me to give an
estimation but i spend a lot of time
reformulating i
i found out in the beginning that if you
don't perform late all you'll have is
leeches
and we're not trying to memorize a phone
book we're trying to memorize very
uh very deep and abstract theorem uh
so uh reformulating over and over and
over
is the result of learning deepers
abstraction and more and more
theorems and of having more and more
ability to prove things
as you keep reformulating theorems
become more and more beautiful
nice okay how would you tackle
a new textbook you wanted to digest for
example
introductory linear algebra how do you
decide what's worth remembering and
what's not
okay so um i gave up textbooks uh
years ago um i started with
by tackling textbooks but the problem
with that
is that often they don't have the best
proof um
so uh at this point i'm much more
incremental
i i learned theorems uh at the
ala carte one by one
rather than a whole book so at this
point i i just want a specific theorem i
might look in a textbook and
and look for a theorem so i would not
recommend tackling a whole textbook
because
uh it suffers from
many prom one of the prom is that all
textbooks strive to be self-contained
and because of that the proofs tend to
be very ugly uh and more complicated
than the more general the most general
proof
that we'll find on wikipedia
so so you're just uh you know going to
the
theorem buffet and picking out what you
want
yeah at this point yes and i find this
way more exciting than looking
at the book that might have a variety of
theorems i might care about or not about
so i go with the theorems that i care
about the most
rather than a list already made by
someone else i don't follow a curriculum
anymore so okay okay so is your decision
about
what's worth remembering just entirely
based on interest
just what you find interesting so
yeah at this point yes i no longer need
a diploma i i do things just for
for my own pleasure so uh there's no
i i don't like having being forced to
memorize things
do you have any um recommendations or
any advice for people who are in
university or school and they're
studying mathematics
um so i i spoke with
one user here that is that
use the space repetition during his
course and
he told me that it made him hate space
repetitions
so i i really wish i had recommendations
but i don't because school is not a
it's not very optimal for learning at
school
there is too much material that is being
shown
during a given day and it's too much
that
space repetition is not able to tackle
that huge quantity
while i'm willing to say that it's
miraculous uh
and super efficient uh
even with the full power of space
repetition it would not be possible to
learn
at the speed uh that's cool uh
demon so what are my recommendations for
people at school
uh cram and dump until you have your
diploma and then
you can learn mathematics for pleasure
afterward and
yeah okay okay
um so oh yeah here's a good question
from deep blue
what cues you to or what what like what
do you notice
is wrong about a flash card or what do
you notice
oh i'm not saying this right but what
causes you to want to reformulate
something
is it like answering a close and you get
it wrong or do you answer a close and
you
realize there's an abstraction you can
make or do you actually search
to manually uh reformulate them or how
do you go about it
okay so um anytime i notice a new
abstraction
i reformulate automatically okay
and then at any time i notice an
improvement i reformulate
so this is cued by just doing an
improvement to approve
anytime i i i think i have a new idea i
always want to incorporate it
and there's another thing that's user
reformulation it's one i have a leash
a leash is just a card i've badly
formulated and
how do i know it's a leash well if it
gives you a headache to answer something
it's a leash
what part of maths do you enjoy the most
is it
doing your repetitions doing the
reformulation or
working on a problem with pen and paper
which which is like the most pleasurable
for you
um they're all pleasurable okay all of
them
yeah um well there are things that are
um
taxing i i find often reformulation to
be very taxing
if it's like a bad leash uh
having to find out that the right
formulation might take a lot of mental
effort
and there are days where i feel tired of
with that
i but i'm very satisfied with the result
afterward
like when your collection is very
beautiful and every
uh every flash card so
but maybe part of the pleasure is just
when i think
naturally about mathematics and to have
all these
these things inside me i
every time i make a new association it
gives me a lot of pleasure
very nice okay if textbooks aren't good
how would you recommend starting to
learn maths for a beginner
um that's a
i in my case i start with it
i guess you could start with a question
that you that interests you
for example in your case uh you said for
example i want to learn algebra
and you realize to learn algebra i need
to learn set theory and then you realize
that to understand set theory you need
to learn logic
exactly so just by having a specific
question in mind
there's there's already an immense list
of knowledge that you need to
incorporate and learn
and eventually you will have learned
some logic some set theories on algebra
and you will be able to generate new
interesting questions and you're already
ready to start toward the infinity
yes yes i'll give my advice obviously
i'm just starting out but
uh probably for um
maybe a year and a half uh i've just
been reading about the history
of mathematics and a little bit about
the philosophy as well
and especially focusing on like the the
the main characters in uh mathematical
history i'm especially interested in the
foundations of mathematics so like
kurt godel comes up a lot uh gail cantor
for set theory and stuff like that and
they all have
oh and turing of course as well and they
all just have such fascinating stories
behind them
and obviously the problems that they
solved
uh or ran into the paradoxes they became
so influential
now even today uh like hundreds of years
later so
um yeah that's my recommendation is just
start with the kind of fluffy stuff like
the history and the
a little bit of the philosophy as well
and there's loads of documentaries on
youtube that you can watch
that will immediately i guarantee that
will get you like a little bit of
interest
uh pumped up because i mean like i hated
math in school
and i really had bad associations with
it um but just by
easing my way in and um learning about
that sort of
uh oh you've got russell's paradox in
there nice
um yeah just easing my way in i found
that to be a very effective method of
becoming more enthusiastic and motivated
to learn
mathematics i think school is not good
for
learning we're learning
other methods oh it's not good for
learning anything it's terrible
um oh yes
how much time do you spend in your srs
software
uh each day and is it like consistently
the same amount of time or does it vary
day to day
that's very day to day for example when
i have a deadline
i i just do my reposition and i don't
try to add new theorems
and there are days where i have nothing
to do but this if i have lots of free
time i might spend eight hours
if i don't have a lot of time i just do
the repetition and it might be
half an hour some days so it's hard to
give a very
consistent number
and i just want to mention that i i too
have been very
uh touched by uh russell and cantor
yeah yeah i really find that fascinating
the the
especially the paradoxes because you can
understand the paradoxes
in like natural language it makes sense
because you can see that there's
a contradiction and then when you
realize that um
for example like mathematics is supposed
to be uh
error-free and you wonder about the
implications of that
it makes it interesting and you can
understand that rationally without
knowing any math really um so
yeah i really recommend actually like
maybe
yeah read read up about russell's
paradox and
um how why it's important and the
philosophy behind it and i guarantee
that will get you interested in learning
more about mathematics
um oh there's another good question here
um yes do you read material
and immediately think of formulating it
into a card
or do you see it once to gain
familiarity and then come back later
to reformulate it as a flashcard
it depends someday uh you see something
and it's so beautiful that you want to
make a flashcard of it
uh and at other times yes you gain
familiarity and then
you you think okay this would make a
good card it's
i think it's like that for everyone even
if you're not a mathematician but you're
using space repetition system
both things will happen to you um
okay has anyone else got any questions
that they want to add
i think we're at around an hour and five
minutes
um so yeah let me know if you have any
final questions i'll ask my
uh final question i had a final question
i've forgotten what it was now
um oh i've remembered my question okay
okay um so why do you think that
um space repetition isn't commonly used
for mathematics it seems like you've
uh benefited so much from it you
mentioned that
you know you have theorems and proofs at
the tip of your fingers and
so on so why do you think it's not
really
talked about or not used widely
um so i think technology is just not
there yet
but at some point it will be there uh
there i i hope that by doing if they
will like this one
there will be more people but it's it's
something that is growing exponentially
already
so so i think it's just not used
because people don't know but more and
more people are knowing
people are adapting it and it always
takes time for a new method
to to get through and uh
another reason it might not be used much
is that
the current learning method school is
not that compatible with it
and it's going to be people that
want to do it and perhaps in my case no
longer need the diploma because they
already have it
or don't need it because in their field
the diploma is not that
necessary but i'm confident that one
day uh most mathematician will use space
repetitions
very interesting yeah uh i'm really
interested to see
how it develops over time whether you'll
see the sorts of like
exponential adoption that it's seen in
other fields like language learning
and some other uh areas like i guess
medicine
students use it as well but but yeah let
me
say there's a difference with language
learning the difference is that it's
much
harder to formulate properly with matter
in math formulation skills are much
are much more complex uh there are other
people that i find very very smart and
very
good in this chat room and uh for
perhaps they lack a little bit of
knowledge for being able to do the
proper formulation
but i i or perhaps they like
encouragement but i'm convinced that
everyone
who want to learn it can learn it
it's just uh the steps are higher
interesting okay well
i think that uh pretty much runs it off
there are a ton of questions that i
didn't get to but
uh i don't want to stretch this on too
long i don't want to exhaust paul he's
got he's got repetitions to do
so um i'm going to call it here and we
can definitely do
more of these in the future paul you
mentioned that you'd uh uh at least for
a bit
you're free of deadlines so yes there
are still way more questions and um
if i didn't get to it this time i will
definitely try and ask it next time
um yeah so i think that's it paul thanks
so much for giving your time by the way
it's always great to hear you talk about
this stuff it's just fascinating
my pleasure all right thanks guys for
showing up
and thanks for the awesome questions and
i'll see you next time